Management – the attainment of organizational goals in an effective and efficient manner through planning, organizing, leading and controlling organizational resources.
Planning – the management function concerned with defining goals for future organizational performance and deciding on the tasks and resources needed to attain them.
Organizing – the management function concerned with assigning tasks, grouping tasks into departments, and allocating resources to departments.
Leading – the management function that involves the use of influence to motivate employees to achieve the organization’s goals.
Controlling – the management function that concerned with monitoring employees’ activities, keeping the organization on track toward its goals, and making corrections as needed.
Organization – a social entity that is goal directed and deliberately structured.
Effectiveness – the degree to which the organization achieves a stated goal.
Efficiency – the use of minimal resources, raw materials, money, and people, to produce a desired volume of output.
Performance – the organization’s ability to attain its goals by using resources in an efficient and effective manner.
Conceptual Skill – the cognitive ability to see the organization as a whole and the relationships among its parts.
Human Skill – the ability to work with and through other people and to work effectively as a group member.
Technical Skill – the understanding of and proficiency in the performance of specific tasks.
Top manager – a manager who is at the top of the organizational hierarchy and is responsible for the entire organization.
Middle manager – a manager who works at the middle levels of the organization and is responsible for major departments.
Project Manager – a manager responsible for a temporary work project that involves the participation of other people from various functions and levels of the organization.
First-line manager – a manager who is at the first or second management level and is directly responsible for the production of goods and services.
Functional manager – a manager who is responsible for a department that performs a single functional task functional task and has employees with similar training and skills.
General Manager – a manger who is responsible for several departments that performs different functions.
Role – a set of expectations for one’s behavior.
Social forces – the aspects of a culture that guide and influence relationships among people, their values, needs and standards of behavior.
Political forces – the influence of political and legal institutions on people and organizations.
Economic forces – forces that affect the availability, production, and distribution of a society’s resources among competing users.
Classical Perspective – a management perspective that emerged during the 19th and early 20th centuries that emphasized a rational, scientific approach to the study of management and sought to make organizations efficient operating machines.
Scientific Management – a subfield of the classical management perspective that emphasized scientifically determined changes in management practices as the solution to improving labor productivity.
Bureaucratic Organizations – a subfield of the classical management perspective that emphasized management on an impersonal, rational basis through such elements as clearly defined authority and responsibility, formal record keeping, and separation of management and ownership.
Administrative principles - a subfield of the classical management perspective that focuses on the total organization rather that the individual worker, delineating the management functions of planning, organizing, commanding, coordinating and controlling.
Humanistic perspective – a management perspective that emerged near the late 19th century and emphasized understanding human behavior, needs and attitudes in the workplace.
Hawthorne studies – a series of experiments on worker productivity begun in 1924 at the Hawthorne plant of Western Electric Company in Illinois; attributed employees’ increased output to managers’ better treatment of them during the study.
Human relations movement – a movement in management thinking and practice that emphasizes satisfaction of employees’ basic needs as the key to increased productivity.
Human resources perspective – a management perspective that suggests jobs should be designed to meet higher level needs by allowing workers to use their full potential.
Behavioral sciences approach – a subfield of the humanistic management perspective that applies social science in an organizational context, drawing from economics, psychology, sociology, and other disciplines.
Management science perspective – a management perspective that emerged after World War II and applied mathematics, statistics, and other quantitative techniques to managerial problems.
System – a set of interrelated parts that function as a whole to achieve a common purpose.
Systems Theory – an extension of the humanistic perspective that describes organizations as open systems characterized by entropy, synergy and subsystem interdependence.
Open System – a system that interacts with the external environment.
Closed System - a system that does not interact with the external environment.
Entropy – the tendency of a system to run down and die.
Synergy – the concept that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts.
Subsystems – parts of a system that depend on one another for their functioning.
Contingency View – an extension of the humanistic perspective in which the successful resolution of organizational problems is thought to depend on managers’ identification of key variations in the situation at hand.
Total Quality Management (TQM) – A concept that focuses on managing the total organization to deliver quality to customers. Four significant elements of TQM are employee involvement, focus on the customer, benchmarking, and customer improvement.
Learning Organization – An organization in which everyone is engaged in identifying and solving problems, enabling the organization to continuously experiment, improve, and increase its capability.
E-business – work an organization does by using electronic linkages.
E-commerce – business exchanges or transactions that occur electronically.
Supply Chain Management – Managing the sequence of suppliers and purchasers, covering all stages of processing from obtaining raw materials to distributing finished goods to final customers.
Enterprise Resource Planning – Systems that unite a company’s major business functions – order processing, product design, purchasing, inventory, and so on.
Knowledge management – the efforts to systematically find, organize and make available a company’s intellectual capital and to foster a culture of continuous learning and knowledge sharing.
Customer relationship management – systems that help companies trade customer’s interaction with the firm and allow employees to call up information on past transactions.
Outsourcing – contracting out selected functions or activities of an organization to other organization that can do the work more cost-efficiently.
Organizational environment – all elements existing outside the organization boundaries that have the potential to affect the organization.
General environment – the layer of the external environment that affects the organization indirectly.
Task environment – the layer of the external environment that directly influences the organization’s operations and performance.
Internal environment – the environment that includes the elements within the organizations boundaries.
International Dimension – portion of the external environment that represents events originating in foreign countries as well as opportunities for U.S. companies in other countries.
Technological Dimension – the dimension general environment that includes scientific and technological advancements in the industry and society at large.
Sociocultural dimension – the dimension of the general environment representing the demographic characteristics, norms, customs and values of the population within which the organization operates.
Economic Dimension – the dimension of the general environment representing the overall economic health of the country or region in which the organization operates.
Legal-political dimension – the dimension of the general environment that includes federal state, and local government regulations and political activities designed to influence company behaviour.
Pressure group – An interest group that works within the legal-political framework to influence companies to behave in socially responsible ways.
Customers – people and organization in the environment who acquire goods or services from the organization.
Competitors – other organization in the same industry or type of business that provide goods or services to the same set of customers.
Suppliers – people or organization who provide the raw materials the organization uses to produce its output.
Labor Market – the people available for hire by the organization.
Boundary spanning roles – roles assumed by people and/or department that link and coordinate the org. w/ key elements in the external environment.
Merger – the combining of two or more organization into one.
Joint Venture – A strategic alliance or program by two or more organizational.
Culture – set of key values, beliefs, understandings and norms that members of an organizational share.
Symbol – An object, act, or event that conveys meaning to others.
Story – A narrative based on true events and repeated frequently and shared among organizational employees.
Hero – A figure who exemplifies the deeds, character, and attributes of a strong corporate culture.
Slogan – A phrase or sentence that succinctly expresses a key corporate value.
Ceremony – A planned at a special event that is conducted for the benefit of an audience.
Adaptability Culture – A culture characterized by values that support the company’s ability to interpret and translate signals from the environment into new behaviour responses.
Achievement Culture – A results-oriented culture that values competitiveness, personal initiative, and achievement.
Involvement Culture – A culture that places high value on meeting the needs of employees and values cooperation and equality.
Consistency Culture – A culture that values and rewards a methodical, rational, orderly way of doing things.
High-Performance Culture – A culture based on a solid on organizational mission or purpose that uses shared adaptive values to guide decisions and business practices and to encourage individual employee ownership of both bottom-line results and the organization’s cultural backbone.
Cultural Leader – A manager who uses signals and symbols to influence corporate culture.